The first thing we do is that we create a "Thread Pool" instead of manually creating a list for storing the thread objects.

We do that using the static method of the "Executors" class named "newFixedThreadPool" which takes as an input the number of threads we want to have in our Thread Pool. 

The "Executors" class is a utility class that provides various factory mehtods to create various types of "Executor" services. An executor service is responsible for managing threads and executing asynchronous tasks, relieving developers from manually creating and managing threads.

The newFixedThreadPool() method creates a thread pool with a fixed number of threads. The pool will re-use the threads for new tasks once they finish executing the previous tasks.

    Executors.newFixedThreadPool(9);

This will return a type of "ExecutorService".

    ExecutorService executorService = Executors.newFixedThreadPool(9);

Now, instead of us creating a new thread, then passing a Runnable using lambda expression and then starting it and also putting it inside a list of threads, all we do is call a method on "executorService" named "submit" and simply pass the Runnable as argument -

        ExecutorService executorService = Executors.newFixedThreadPool(9);
        for(int i = 1; i < 10; i++) {
            int finalI = i;
            executorService.submit(() -> {
                long result = factorial(finalI);
                System.out.println("Factorial of "+ finalI + " is "+ result);
            });
        }

Now, if you run the code, you will see something interesting.

Even though we get the factorial of all numbers in the terminal, our program still keeps running. It did not stop automatically as it was doing before.

That's because we have to manually "shutdown" the ExecutorService. And we do that using "shutdown" method of the "ExecutorService" -

    ExecutorService executorService = Executors.newFixedThreadPool(9);
    for(int i = 1; i < 10; i++) {
        int finalI = i;
        executorService.submit(() -> {
            long result = factorial(finalI);
            System.out.println("Factorial of "+ finalI + " is "+ result);
        });
    }

    executorService.shutdown();

And it is not necessary that you need 9 threads because you have 9 loop iterations. We can also have less than 9 threads and in that case, threads will be reused.

So, we can say - 

    ExecutorService executorService = Executors.newFixedThreadPool(3);

In this case since there are 3 threads and 9 numbers so one thread will find the factorial of more than one number.

This was not possible with our previous approach beacuse we couldn't reuse a thread once it is used for execution.

When we use "shutdown", it basically means we cannot submit any more tasks to that ExecutorService object. Even if we try to do so, an exception will be thrown when we run the code - 

    executorService.shutdown();
    executorService.submit(() -> System.out.println("Hello World"));

The above code will throw the "RejectedExecutionException" exception.

Now, it is important to note that calling "shutdown" does not mean the "main" thread will wait for all the threads to execute inside the Thread Pool. It just means that we cannot submit any more tasks and so, the program doesn't keep running after all tasks are done.

If we want to make sure the print statement to print the time taken to find factorial of all numbers runs only after all the threads have executed, there is a method named "awaitTermination" in the "ExecutorService" class that we can use.

    executorService.shutdown();

    try {
        executorService.awaitTermination(100, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
    } catch (InterruptedException e) {
        throw new RuntimeException(e);
    }

What does "awaitTermination" do?

This method will "wait" for the termination of the tasks and will allow the current thread (main thread in our case) to block until either all the tasks complete execution or the timeout period expires or the thread is interrupted.

Remember that first, you call shutdown() or shutdownNow() on the ExecutorService to prevent new tasks from being submitted. The already submitted tasks continue executing.

After calling shutdown(), you use awaitTermination() to wait for a specified amount of time for all tasks to finish their execution. If all tasks complete within the specified time, awaitTermination() returns true. If the timeout is reached and not all tasks are finished, it returns false.

    executorService.awaitTermination(100, TimeUnit.SECONDS);

This method takes two arguments. First is the "timeout" value and the second is the "TimeUnit". So, in above code, we are saying that the timeout is 100 seconds. So, if all tasks do not complete withing 100 seconds, then it will return false.

If the waiting thread is interrupted, then the "InterruptedException" will be thrown. That's why, we have to use try catch around it.

And finally, we will see that in the terminal, first all the tasks are executed and the factorial of each number if printed. Then, we see the output that shows the total time taken to calculate the factorial of the numbers from 1 to 9.

## SETTING AN INDEFINITE TIMEOUT

What if we do not want to set some specific value as a timeout. We just want to wait until all tasks are executed?

Well, the "awaitTermination" returns a "boolean" value. So, if timeout is not passed and all tasks are executed, it will return "true". Otherwise, it returns false.

So, we can use this to our advantage and write something like this - 

    try {
        while(!executorService.awaitTermination(1, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS)) {
            System.out.println("Waiting...");
        }
    } catch (InterruptedException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
    }

Now, until the "awaitTermination" does not return "true", this while loop will keep running endlessly. So, it will basically wait for all the tasks to execute and so, we do not have any timeout as such.