There is not just one type of "submit" method in the "ExecutorService" interface. There are actually three different types - 

    <T> Future<T> submit(Callable<T> task);
    <T> Future<T> submit(Runnable task, T result);
    Future<?> submit(Runnable task);

So, we can also pass a "Callable" type in this method and also a "Runnable" type. What is the difference between the two?

Well, if you open the definition of "Runnable", it is like this - 

    public interface Runnable {
        void run();
    }

And if you run open the definition of "Callable", it is like this - 

    public interface Callable<V> {
        V call() throws Exception;
    }

Did you notice something?

Even though both interfaces have the only one abstract method (they are both functional interfaces), the "Callable" interface has a method that will "return" something. On the other hand, the "Runnable" interface has a method that does not return something.

And this is a very important difference between the two. One returns something and the other does not.

That's why, we have a question mark here - 

    Future<?> submit(Runnable task);

And that's why, if we want to use a "Runnable" and return something, we have to pass the result separately - 

    <T> Future<T> submit(Runnable task, T result);

And for this reason, when we wrote - 

    executorService.submit(() -> 42);

We were not passing a "Runnable" here inside "submit". Because here, the lambda expression returns a value "42". But as we know, a "Runnable" does not return something. So, in this case, we are actually passing a "Callable".

We can also write the above line as - 

    Callable<Integer> callable = new Callable<Integer>() {
        @Override
        public Integer call() throws Exception {
            return 42;
        }
    };

    Future<?> future = executorService.submit(callable);

Or we can write - 

    Callable<Integer> callable = ()  -> 42;
    Future<?> future = executorService.submit(callable);

But, we cannot write -

    Runnable runnable = ()  -> 42;

The compiler will show an error because we cannot return anything if we are using a "Runnable".

Another difference between the two is that "Callable" has a method that can throw checked exceptions. On the other hand, "Runnable" has a method that does not throw any checked exceptions. 

The "Runnable" interface is typically used when we are using "Thread" class or "Executor" interface.

On the other hand, the "Callable" interface is typically used with "ExecutorService".

Now, when we use "Runnable" inside "submit" method, that does not mean we won't get a "Future" returned from this method. That will always happen. It is just that the "Future" won't have any value when we call get(). It will simply show "null" in that case.

So, we can write -

    Runnable runnable = ()  -> System.out.println("Hello World!");
    Future<?> future = executorService.submit(runnable);
    System.out.println(future.get());

And this is a valid code.

What if we want to use a Runnable and also want to return some value? For that, we have this method -

    <T> Future<T> submit(Runnable task, T result);

So, we can actually call the "submit" match in a way that we pass a "Runnable" as the first argument and the "return value" as the second argument.

So, if we have the below code - 

    Runnable runnable = () -> System.out.println("Hello World!");

    Future<Integer> future = executorService.submit(runnable, 10);

    System.out.println("The result is " + future.get());

This will not only print "Hello World" as the Runnable is executed, but it will also return a value "10" which we can access using "future.get()".

# invokeAll() METHOD

There is a method named "invokeAll" in the "ExecutorService that lets us pass a "Collection" of tasks. And this will return a list of "Futures" that holding the status and results. Note that when we say "completed" task, it means either that task executes normally or throws an exception.

There are two versions of this method in the "ExecutorService" interface - 

    <T> List<Future<T>> invokeAll(Collection<? extends Callable<T>> tasks) throws InterruptedException;

    <T> List<Future<T>> invokeAll(Collection<? extends Callable<T>> tasks, long timeout, TimeUnit unit) throws InterruptedException;

So, it takes a collection of "Callables".

So, if we have the following list of "Callables" - 

    Callable<Integer> callable1 = () -> {
        System.out.println("Hello from Callable 1");
        return 1;
    };

    Callable<Integer> callable2 = () -> {
        System.out.println("Hello from Callable 2");
        return 2;
    };

    Callable<Integer> callable3 = () -> {
        System.out.println("Hello from Callable 3");
        return 3;
    };

    Callable<Integer> callable4 =() -> {
        System.out.println("Hello from Callable 4");
        return 4;
    };

    List<Callable<Integer>> callables = new ArrayList<>();
    callables.add(callable1);
    callables.add(callable2);
    callables.add(callable3);
    callables.add(callable4);

We can now pass this entire list to the "ExecutorService" using "invokeAll" - 

    List<Future<Integer>> futures = executorService.invokeAll(callables);

And this will give us a list of "Futures" where each future holds the status and the result of each callable.

One thing worth noting is that the "invokeAll" method blocks the main thread so it has to wait for all the tasks to complete before any futher code in Main thread runs. And we can see that in action is we print some statement after the invokeAll is called.

So, if we have - 

    List<Future<Integer>> futures = executorService.invokeAll(callables);
    System.out.println("In Main Thread");
    executorService.shutdown();

This will not print "In Main Thread" immediately. We will first get the print statements of all the callables printed in the terminal and then the "In Main Thread" gets printed.

Another way to see this is to add some delay in Callables. So, if we do - 

    Callable<Integer> callable2 = () -> {
        Thread.sleep(1000);
        System.out.println("Hello from Callable 2");
        return 2;
    };

Now, the main thread will wait for all the tasks to complete before printing "In Main Thread" and this also includes this delay of 1 second in the second callable.

Finally, to get the results, we can simply iterate over the list of futures - 

    futures.forEach(future -> {
        try {
            System.out.println("Result -> "+ future.get());
        } catch (InterruptedException | ExecutionException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        }
    });

Another variation of the "invokeAll" is the one to which we can pass a "timeout" so that if till that time all tasks are not completed, then the incomplete tasks are cancelled.

Let's say we want the timeout to be 500ms. So we write - 

    List<Future<Integer>> futures = executorService.invokeAll(callables, 500, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS);

And since we know that in above code, the task 2 has a delay of 1000ms, it means that task will be cancelled as it cannot be completed within 500ms.

If a task is cancelled, it will throw the "CancellationException". So we have to handle it as well - 

    Futures.forEach(future -> {
        try {
            System.out.println("Result -> "+ future.get());
        } catch (InterruptedException | ExecutionException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        } catch (CancellationException e) {
            System.out.println("Task cancelled");
        }
    });

Now, the terminal will be like - 

    Result -> 1
    Task cancelled
    Result -> 3
    Result -> 4

# invokeAny() METHOD

There is another method in the "ExecutorService" interface named "invokeAny()". There are two versions of it - 

    <T> T invokeAny(Collection<? extends Callable<T>> tasks) throws InterruptedException, ExecutionException;

    <T> T invokeAny(Collection<? extends Callable<T>> tasks, long timeout, TimeUnit unit) throws InterruptedException, ExecutionException, TimeoutException;

Yet again, this one takes a Collection of "Callables" and the second version takes the timeout. But, what's the difference between "invokeAny" and "invokeAll"?

We know that "invokeAll" will wait for all the tasks in the collection to complete before returning us a list of Futures. And so, this method blocks the code until all tasks are completed, either successfully or with exceptions.

When it comes to "invokeAny", it will return the result of "one" successfully completed task. As soon as one task comletes, it cancels all the other remaining tasks. So, it only blocks the code until one task successfully completes.

The return value of "invokeAny" is simply the result of first successfully completed task, not a future.

    Integer result = null;
    
    try {
        result = executorService.invokeAny(callables);
    } catch (InterruptedException e) {
        throw new RuntimeException(e);
    } catch (ExecutionException e) {
        throw new RuntimeException(e);
    }
    
So, even if we pass it a list of multiple callables, as soon as one callable completes, the "invokeAny" immediately stops and returns the result.

# THE CONCLUSION

Use Runnable when the task doesn't need to return a result or throw exceptions.

Use Callable when the task needs to return a result or might throw checked exceptions.