So far, we have worked with the "ExecutorService" interface but there is another important interface in the Executors Framework. It is the "ScheduledExecutorService" interface.

Let's recall what the "ExecutorService" interface does. The main purpose is to "manage" and "control" a pool of threads to execute the tasks asynchronously. We just submit tasks (Runnable or Callable) for execution and we do not have to worry about managing the threads manually.

Now, the "ScheduledExecutorService" is an interface that "extends" the "ExecutorService" interface.

    public interface ScheduledExecutorService extends ExecutorService{...}

This means, whatever features we get from "ExecutorService", we also get from "ScheduledExecutorService". But on top of all that, we get some extra features.

As the name suggests, the "ScheduledExecutorService" offers us support to "schedule" tasks to run aftersome delay or at a fixed rate.

Maybe we have a requirement of a timer in our project or we have some repetitive jobs to execute. So, we can schedule tasks to run at a specific time or periodically.

# CREATING A NEW SCHEDULEDEXECUTORSERVICE

As we know, if we have to create a new "ExecutorService", we do something like this - 

    ExecutorService executorService = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();

    OR

    ExecutorService executorService = Executors.newFixedThreadPool(2);

Similarly, if we want a new "ScheduledExecutorService", then we again use "Executors" class for that.

There are various methods in the "Executors" class which give us a type of "ScheduledExecutorService". For example - 

    public static ScheduledExecutorService newSingleThreadScheduledExecutor() {...}

    public static ScheduledExecutorService newSingleThreadScheduledExecutor(ThreadFactory threadFactory) {...}

    public static ScheduledExecutorService newScheduledThreadPool( int corePoolSize, ThreadFactory threadFactory) {...}

    public static ScheduledExecutorService unconfigurableScheduledExecutorService(ScheduledExecutorService executor) {...}

So, let's use a method named "newSingleThreadScheduledExecutor" to create a thread pool with 1 thread.

    ScheduledExecutorService executorService = Executors.newScheduledThreadPool(1);

Now, this "ScheduledExecutorService" interface has these methods in it - 

    public ScheduledFuture<?> schedule(Runnable command, long delay, TimeUnit unit);

    public <V> ScheduledFuture<V> schedule(Callable<V> callable, long delay, TimeUnit unit);

    public ScheduledFuture<?> scheduleAtFixedRate(Runnable command, long initialDelay, long period, TimeUnit unit);

    public ScheduledFuture<?> scheduleWithFixedDelay(Runnable command, long initialDelay, long delay, TimeUnit unit);

# schedule() METHOD

So, we have a method named "schedule" that takes either a "Runnable" or a "Callable" and it also takes a delay as argument which is basically the time after which we want that task to be executed.

If we write something like this - 

    executorService.schedule(() -> System.out.println("Hello World"), 5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);

    executorService.shutdown();

So here, we are passing a "Runnable" that simply prints "Hello World". And since we are also passing a time of "5" seconds, it means that this Runnable will be executed only after a delay of 5 seconds. Note that this was not the case with the normal "ExecutorService" which would execute the tasks immediately as we run the program.

# scheduleAtFixedRate() METHOD

What if we want to run a task repeatedly at a fixed interval with no regard for the task's duration. Well, for that, we have the "scheduleAtFixedRate()" method.

    executorService.scheduleAtFixedRate(
        () -> System.out.println("Hello World"), 
        0, 
        5, 
        TimeUnit.SECONDS
    );

    executorService.shutdown();

So here we are saying that there is a task that prints "Hello World". The value "0" means that the initial delay is 0 seconds so the first "Hello World" is printed instantly. Then, after very "5" seconds, the task runs again.

But, if you run the code, then you won't see anything in the terminal and the code will end without printing anything at all. That's because of the "shutdown()" call that we have.

We are immediately calling "shutdown()" after we are scheduling our task. 

When you call "shutdown()", it begins the process of shutting down the "ScheduledExecutorService", which means it stops accepting new tasks and tries to terminate currently running ones after they finish.

Since you call "shutdown()" right after scheduling the task, the scheduled task may not have enough time to run, or it gets canceled before executing at the next scheduled interval.

You might argue why was it working when we used the "schedule()" method. It is very important to understand that with "schedule()", we schedule a "one-time" task to execute after a certain delay. And so, as soon as we call "schedule()", that new task is accepted by the "ExecutorService" and that's why it is executed even if we call the "shutdown()" method immediately.

So, what if we remove this "shutdown()" call?

Well, in that case, the code will run indefinitely and will need us to stop the program. Instead what we can do is, we can run the "shutdown" method after some delay. Maybe we want a task to be performed every 5 seconds for the next 1 minute.

So, we can write something like - 

    executorService.scheduleAtFixedRate(() -> System.out.println("Hello World"), 0, 5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);

    try {
        Thread.sleep(60000); <- WAIT FOR 1 Minute
    } catch (InterruptedException e) {
        throw new RuntimeException(e);
    }

    executorService.shutdown(); <- CALLED AFTER 1 MINUTE

Another way to wait for 1 minute is to use "schedule()" and as a task, we simply call "shutdown()" - 

    executorService.scheduleAtFixedRate(() -> System.out.println("Hello World"), 0, 5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);

    executorService.schedule(executorService::shutdown, 1, TimeUnit.MINUTES);

So now, after 1 minute, the "shutdown()" will be called and hence, no more tasks will be accepted by the "ScheduledExecutorService".

# scheduleWithFixedDelay() METHOD

Finally, we have a method named "scheduleWithFixedDelay()" in the "ScheduledExecutorService" interface.

This method lets us schedule a task to run repeatedly after a fixed delay between the termination of one execution and start of the next.

Let's understand it in simple words.

When we use "scheduleAtFixedRate()", then it does not care about how much time each task is taking. All it cares about is that a task needs to run after "x" time units.

So, suppose we have a task that we pass to "scheduleAtFixedRate()" which takes 20 seconds to execute. And we have specified a delay of "5" seconds. It means, after every 5 seconds, a new task will be submitted and that in turn will take 20 seconds to execute.

We do not want to have this functionality every time in our code.

What if, we want to submit a new task only "x" timeunits after the previous task has executed. And that's the use case for which the "scheduleWithFixedDelay()" is used.

Let's understand this with an example.

    executorService.scheduleAtFixedRate(() -> {
            try {
                    Thread.sleep(10000);
                } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                    throw new RuntimeException(e);
                }
                System.out.println("Hello World");
            },
            0,
            5,
            TimeUnit.SECONDS
    );

    executorService.schedule(executorService::shutdown, 20, TimeUnit.SECONDS);


So, what is happening here? The task that we are submitting waits for "10" seconds before it executes. And we submit a task after every 5 seconds to the scheduler. Finally, after 20 seconds, the shutdown() method is called.

Here is what happens.

    Since initial delay is 0, TASK 1 is submitted at time = 0s (In the background it will execute after 10 seconds)
    TASK 2 is submitted at time = 5s (In the background it will execute after 10 seconds)
    TASK 3 is submitted at time = 10s (In the background it will execute after 10 seconds)
    TASK 4 is submitted at time = 15s (In the background it will execute after 10 seconds)
    TASK 5 is submitted at time = 20s (In the background it will execute after 10 seconds)

And finally, the "shutdown()" method is called. So, we will see this in the terminal - 

    Hello World
    Hello World
    Hello World
    Hello World
    Hello World

    Process finished with exit code 0

So even though each task takes "10" seconds to execute, the scheduler doesn't care about that. All it cares about is accepting tasks every 5 seconds.

And now, let's see what happens when we use "scheduleAtFixedDelay()" method - 

    executorService.scheduleWithFixedDelay(
            () -> {
                try {
                    Thread.sleep(10000);
                } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                    throw new RuntimeException(e);
                }
                System.out.println("Hello World");
            },
            0,
            5,
            TimeUnit.SECONDS
    );
    
    executorService.schedule(executorService::shutdown, 20, TimeUnit.SECONDS);

Again, we have the same situtation here. The only difference is we are calling "scheduleWithFixedDelay". Now, let's see what happens.


    Since initial delay is 0, TASK 1 is submitted at time = 0s (In the background it will execute after 10 seconds)
    At time = 10s, the TASK 1 completes its execution.
    And now, the schedular waits for "5" seconds before accpeting the new task.
    At time = 15s, the TASK 2 is submitted (In the background it will execute after 10 seconds)
    At time = 20s, the "shutdown()" method is called and no more tasks can be submitted now.
    At time = 25s, TASK 2 will be executed.

And so, we will see this in terminal - 

    Hello World
    Hello World

    Process finished with exit code 0

And so here, the schedular will wait for a task to complete first and then wait for the amount of time we have specified in the "scheduleWithFixedDelay" method before it accepts another task.

And that's the difference between the "scheduleAtFixedDelay()" and "scheduleAtFixedRate()".