Let's take an example.

Suppose, we have a class like this - 

    public class VolatileCounter {
        private int counter = 0;

        public void increment() {
            counter++;
        }

        public int getCounter() {
            return counter;
        }

        public static void main(String[] args) throws InterruptedException {
            VolatileCounter vc = new VolatileCounter();

            Thread t1 = new Thread(() -> {
                for(int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) {
                    vc.increment();
                }
            });

            Thread t2 = new Thread(() -> {
                for(int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) {
                    vc.increment();
                }
            });

            t1.start();
            t2.start();

            t1.join();
            t2.join();

            System.out.println("Counter is: "+ vc.getCounter());

        }

    }

So, we simply have a variable "counter" which is initially 0. Then, we have two methods, one is "increment" which will increment the "counter" by 1 each time it is called. The other is "getCounter()" which simply returns the current value of "counter".

Now, in the main method, we have two threads and both will increment the counter 1000 times. So, ideally, when we run the above code, we should see the "Counter is: 2000" printed in the terminal, right?

But, as you run the code multiple times, you will see that not every time the output is 2000. Sometimes it is less than 2000 as well. And we know the reason for this because multiple threads are trying to increment the same value so they are not synchronized.

One solution is to use the "synchronized" keyword - 

    public synchronized void increment() {
        counter++;
    }

But, can we use "volatile" keyword here? Let's try using that on "counter" variable.

    private volatile int counter = 0;

    public void increment() {
        counter++;
    }

We will see that this won't solve our problem because still, the value in terminal is not always 2000. Sometimes, it is less than 2000. And this is not surprising because all that "volatile" does is force the threads to read or write values from/to the main memory. This won't stop multiple threads to increment or decrement a value at the same time.

If we use "volatile", then the IDE will show a warning when we do "counter++". The IDE will say - 

    Non-atomic operation on volatile field 'counter'.

"Atomicity" in multithreading refers to the concept that an operation or a series of operations is performed as a single, indivisible unit. This means that the operation is either completed fully without interruption or not performed at all. In the context of multithreading, atomicity ensures that no other thread can observe the operation in an incomplete state.

So, in our code, we have -

    private int counter = 0;

    public void increment() {
        counter++;
    }

Here, the "counter++" statement is not atomic. It consists of three steps -

    - Reading the current value of counter.
    - Incrementing the value by 1.
    - Writing the new value back to counter.

If two threads execute "counter++" simultaneously, they could both read the same initial value, increment it independently, and write the same result back. This leads to incorrect results because both threads end up "losing" one increment.

One solution is to use "synchronized" keyword. The synchronized keyword ensures that only one thread at a time can execute a block of code, thus enforcing atomicity. Another way is to use "Locks" such as "ReentrantLocks".

But, there is another way and that's using "Atomic" variables.

# ATOMIC VARIABLES

Java provides atomic classes like "AtomicInteger", "AtomicBoolean", and "AtomicReference", which support atomic operations on single variables.

So, instead of defining the "counter" as simply an "int", we can define it as an "AtomicInteger" -

    private AtomicInteger counter = new AtomicInteger(0);

And now, to increment the "counter", we do not do "counter++", instead, there is a method that we can use named "incrementAndGet()" which increments the counter and returns its new value -

    public void increment() {
        counter.incrementAndGet();
    }

Similarly, to get the value of this counter, we can use "get()" method -

    public int getCounter() {
        return counter.get();
    }

And now, everything will work fine.

Atomicity is especially important in compound operations (like if-then checks or reading-modifying-writing multiple variables). Without atomicity, other threads can observe intermediate, inconsistent states.

Let's say we have this code - 

    if (balance >= amount) {
        balance -= amount;
    }

Here, without atomicity, two threads could both check balance, see that it’s sufficient, and proceed to decrement it, potentially resulting in a negative balance.

To enforce atomicity, such operations should either:

    - Be synchronized.
    - Use an atomic variable, if applicable.
    - Use locks, if more control is needed.

So, the bottom line is -

    - Atomicity means an operation completes fully as a single step without interruptions.
    - It prevents inconsistent states by ensuring that other threads cannot see intermediate results.
    - Java provides synchronized, atomic classes, and locks to enforce atomicity and prevent race conditions.